#summary Audio and Acoustical Response Analysis Environment in Matlab - a free open-source extensible resource to support exploration, teaching and research in audio and acoustics.

= Introduction =
AARAE is a Matlab-hosted environment for measurement, processing and analysis of audio system and acoustic system responses. It is designed to run through a simple graphical user interface, but also to be useable by directly calling particular AARAE functions.
AARAE aims to encourage exploration of measurement and analysis possibilities, rather than only presenting the best or the standard method. Hence easy extensibility is a key feature of AARAE - with only a little additional code, users can drag and drop their own functions into AARAE, so that they add to the exploratory tools accessible through the graphical user interface.

= Authorship and Community =
The initial code infrastructure of AARAE is authored by Densil Cabrera and Daniel Ricardo Jimenez Pinilla. AARAE is intended to be a community project, and we hope that the amount of community-contributed code will grow to be substantially larger than the core infrastructure. Contributors of code retain their own copyright, and all code is distributed under the BSD 3-clause license.

= Main Concepts =

== Extensible Components==
AARAE has four categories of functions that can be easily added to by a user:
=== Calculators ===
Calculators are implementations of theoretical or empirical models that may be helpful in understanding acoustic or audio systems or processes, but which are not directly concerned with measurement. For example, a calculator could implement an acoustic model of a room, which a user might then compare to measurements made in a real room of the same dimensions.

=== Generators ===
Generators are used to generate signals for use in measurement. Examples include generators of swept sinusoids, impulses, noise, STIPA, and so on. A generator can return both a primary and secondary signal (e.g., an inverse sweep for deriving an impulse response from a sinusoidal sweep).

=== Processors ===
A processor has audio input and audio output - it is used to modify audio in some way. Filtering and beamforming are examples of processes that are very commonly used in audio and acoustic measurement, but there are many other types of processors that can contribute to exploration.

=== Analysers ===
An analyser is primarily concerned with generating a user-readable output, which is typically numeric and/or graphical. There is, perhaps, a grey area between analysers and processors - where a function returns both audio and user-readable results - in which case the code author needs to decide what the best category is.



This page is under construction.